Modify cell from file (#1386)
neams-th-coe/cardinal: doc/content/source/modelmodifiers/OpenMCCellMaterialFill.md

!listing test/tests/model_modifiers/cell_material_fill/openmc.i
  block=Problem

> ## A note about modifying via file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Providing materials via file
```

> The `material_ids_file` parameter is powerful for larger models where it would be too tedious and extremely difficult to verify using the `material_ids` param. However, this requires care when creating the HDF5 (`*.h5`) file. For TRISO problems specifically, there is a bit of nuance to be aware of. As soon as there is a reason to vary TRISO material composition throughout the reactor (e.g. to study the effects of depletion or to test loading different enrichments), it becomes necessairy to use a distribmat list to specify what `openmc.Materials` go in which TRISO instance. Models not concerned with this can use the same fuel material in every TRISO in the problem and do not need this feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `material_ids_file` parameter is powerful for larger models where it would be too tedious and extremely difficult to use the `material_ids` param in the input file. However, using a file-based set of materials requires care when creating the HDF5 (`*.h5`) file. For TRISO problems specifically, there is a bit of nuance to be aware of. As soon as there is a reason to vary TRISO material composition throughout the reactor (e.g. to study the effects of depletion or to test loading different enrichments), it becomes necessary to use a distribmat list to specify what OpenMC materials go in which TRISO instance. Models not concerned with this can use the same fuel material in every TRISO in the problem and do not need this feature.
```

> OpenMC allows specifiying the distribmat list of a cell via `openmc.Cell.fill = [...]`.  This list should be **constructed carefully**, and once complete, it can be used to generate the HDF5 file used in Cardinal (see section below). The list needs to have as many entries as there are fuel spheres in the entire model. Say there are `N` TRISO cells per fuel cyilnder, then the list `[...]` needs to start with `N` entries corresponding to the material ("zone") in the first fuel compact. The next `N` entries should correspond to whatever material goes in the second fuel compact, and so on. **It is highly reccomended to use the OpenMC Plotter when figuring out the order cell instance increases throughout the cells in your model.** 

Reviewer: Instead of "see section below" you can crosslink and name that section, similar to latex. There are examples elsewhere in the docs

> OpenMC allows specifiying the distribmat list of a cell via `openmc.Cell.fill = [...]`.  This list should be **constructed carefully**, and once complete, it can be used to generate the HDF5 file used in Cardinal (see section below). The list needs to have as many entries as there are fuel spheres in the entire model. Say there are `N` TRISO cells per fuel cyilnder, then the list `[...]` needs to start with `N` entries corresponding to the material ("zone") in the first fuel compact. The next `N` entries should correspond to whatever material goes in the second fuel compact, and so on. **It is highly reccomended to use the OpenMC Plotter when figuring out the order cell instance increases throughout the cells in your model.** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenMC allows specifiying the distribmat list of a cell via `openmc.Cell.fill = [...]`.  This list should be **constructed carefully**, and once complete, it can be used to generate the HDF5 file used in Cardinal (see section below). The list needs to have as many entries as there are fuel spheres in the entire model. Say there are `N` TRISO cells per fuel cyilnder, then the list `[...]` needs to start with `N` entries corresponding to the material ("zone") in the first fuel compact. The next `N` entries should correspond to whatever material goes in the second fuel compact, and so on. **It is highly reccomended to use the [OpenMC plotter](https://github.com/openmc-dev/plotter) when figuring out the order cell instance increases throughout the cells in your model.** 
```

Reviewer: can you also rephrase "order cell instance increases throughout"? I'm kind of confused by the grammar and not 100% sure what this saying. Does "order that the cell instances increase throughout" match the intention?

Author: Yeah you said it better. It's the order in which cell instances increase, which is not always obvious to users IMO

> If the number of materials does not line up with the instances correctly, then the materials will be split between different fuel cylinders, which is not correct. A note about the instances of a TRISO cell when using `create_triso_lattice` Say there are `M` physical TRISOs that are inside the cylinder. The number of instances `N` will be greater than `M` because of the way that instances are split when a TRISO particle lives between boundaries in the search lattice. Make sure to verify the number of **instances** of your TRISO cell because this is how many entires need to exist for each fuel compact, not the actual physical number of spheres in the fuel cylinder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the number of materials does not line up with the instances correctly, then the materials will be split between different fuel cylinders, which is not correct. A note about the instances of a TRISO cell when using `create_triso_lattice`: Say there are `M` physical TRISOs that are inside the cylinder. The number of instances `N` will be greater than `M` because of the way that instances are split when a TRISO particle lives between boundaries in the search lattice. Make sure to verify the number of **instances** of your TRISO cell because this is how many entries need to exist for each fuel compact, not the actual physical number of spheres in the fuel cylinder.
```

!listing test/tests/model_modifiers/cell_material_fill/openmc.i
  block=Problem

## Providing materials via file

The `material_ids_file` parameter is powerful for larger models where it would be too tedious and extremely difficult to use the `material_ids` param in the input file. However, using a file-based set of materials requires care when creating the HDF5 (`*.h5`) file. For TRISO problems specifically, there is a bit of nuance to be aware of. As soon as there is a reason to vary TRISO material composition throughout the reactor (e.g. to study the effects of depletion or to test loading different enrichments), it becomes necessary to use a distribmat list to specify what OpenMC material goes in which TRISO instance. Models not concerned with this can use the same fuel material in every TRISO in the problem, and do not need this feature.

> OpenMC allows specifiying the distribmat list of a cell in the python model building script via `openmc.Cell.fill = [...]`. The actual list can be used to generate an HDF5 file used by Cardinal. See this [section](#How to automate material fill to HDF5) for more details.  The list needs to have as many entries as there are cell instances in the entire model. Say there are `N` TRISO cells per fuel cyilnder, then the list `[...]` needs to start with `N` entries corresponding to the material ("zone") in the first fuel compact. The next `N` entries should correspond to whatever material goes in the second fuel compact, and so on. +It is highly recommended to use the [OpenMC plotter](https://github.com/openmc-dev/plotter) when figuring out the order that the cell instances increase throughout the cells in your model.+

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenMC allows specifiying the distribmat list of a cell in the python model building script via `openmc.Cell.fill = [...]`. The actual list can be used to generate an HDF5 file used by Cardinal. See this [section](#How to automate material fill to HDF5) for more details.  The list needs to have as many entries as there are cell instances in the entire model. Say there are `N` TRISO cells per fuel cylinder, then the list `[...]` needs to start with `N` entries corresponding to the material ("zone") in the first fuel compact. The next `N` entries should correspond to whatever material goes in the second fuel compact, and so on. +It is highly recommended to use the [OpenMC plotter](https://github.com/openmc-dev/plotter) when figuring out the order that the cell instances increase throughout the cells in your model.+
```

!alert warning

> The material instance list should be constructed carefully! Generally, you want the all TRISO particles within the same fuel compact to have the same material. If the ordering of materials is off, the materials may not line up as you expect. Especially in TRISO model, if the wrong number of materials are specified, the materials will not group nicely by cylinder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The material instance list should be constructed carefully! If the ordering of materials is off, the materials may not line up as you expect. Especially in TRISO models, if the wrong number of materials are specified, the materials may not get applied to the geometry as you expect.
```

Reviewer: > Generally, you want the all TRISO particles within the same fuel compact to have the same material. 

This feels specific to your use case and not a general rule - does it need to be here on this documentation page, or can it be removed?

Author: I'm fine to leave it a bit more general but at least mention details of using this for TRISO models

!alert note

> Regarding the number of instances for a TRISO cell when using OpenMC's `create_triso_lattice`: Say there are `M` physical TRISOs that are inside the cylinder. The number of instances `N` typically will be greater than `M` due to the search lattice. When a TRISO particle splits multiple voxels in the search lattice, there is an instance for each voxel that it is a part of to help accelerate transport. +Make sure to verify the number of instances of your TRISO fuel cell+. This is how many entries need to exist for each fuel compact, which is not the same as the actual physical number of spheres in the fuel cylinder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regarding the number of instances for a TRISO cell when using OpenMC's `create_triso_lattice`: Say there are `M` physical TRISOs that are inside a cylinder. The number of instances `N` typically will be greater than `M` due to the search lattice. When a TRISO particle splits multiple voxels in the search lattice, there is an instance for each voxel that it is a part of to help accelerate transport. +Make sure to verify the number of instances of your TRISO fuel cell+. This is how many entries need to exist for each fuel compact, which is not the same as the actual physical number of spheres in the fuel cylinder.
```
